Generic Partial Decryption as Feature
Engineering for Neural Distinguishers
Emanuele Bellini1[0000−0002−2349−0247] , Rocco Brunelli2[0009−0005−2481−410X] ,
David Gerault1[0000−0001−8583−0668] , Anna Hambitzer1[0000−0002−5357−832X] ,
and Marco Pedicini2[0000−0002−9016−074X]
1

Technology Innovation Institute, Abu Dhabi, UAE
{name.lastname}@tii.ae
2
Roma Tre University, Rome, Italy
{name.lastname}@uniroma3.it

Abstract. In Neural Cryptanalysis, a deep neural network is trained as
a cryptographic distinguisher between pairs of ciphertexts (F (X), F (X ⊕
δ)), where F is either a random permutation or a block cipher, δ is a
ﬁxed diﬀerence. The AutoND framework aims to use neural distinguishers that are treated as a generic tool and discourages cipher-speciﬁc optimizations. On the other hand, works such as [LLS+ 24] obtain superior
distinguishers by adding dedicated features, such as selected parts of the
diﬀerence in the previous rounds, to the input of the neural distinguishers. In this paper, we study Generic Partial Decryption as a feature
engineering technique and integrate it within a fully automated pipeline,
where we evaluate its eﬀect independently of the number of pairs per
sample, with which feature engineering is often combined. We show that
this technique matches state-of-the-art dedicated approaches on Simon
and Simeck. Additionally, we apply it to Aradi, and present a practical
neural-assisted key recovery for 5 rounds, as well as a 7-rounds key recovery with 270 time complexity. Additionally, we derive useful information
from the neural distinguishers and propose a non-neural version of our
5-round key recovery.

Keywords: Neural Cryptanalysis · Diﬀerential Cryptanalysis · Block Cipher
· Partial Decryption · Simon· Simeck· Aradi

1

Introduction

Block ciphers are a cornerstone of modern cryptography, and secure block ciphers
can be used as a building block for many symmetric key primitives, making their
analysis one of the most fundamental problems in symmetric cryptanalysis.
Diﬀerential Cryptanalysis. Diﬀerential cryptanalysis, the study of how modiﬁcations of the inputs propagate to the output, is one of the most important
techniques for establishing bounds on the resistance of block ciphers. While it
was ﬁrst publicly presented by Biham and Shamir in 1990 [BS91], it is believed

2

E. Bellini et al.

to have been known and used as early as 1974 [Cop94]. Despite 50 years of
research, new insights on diﬀerential cryptanalysis are still presented regularly
at major security conferences. For instance, a new generic diﬀerential key recovery algorithm was presented at Eurocrypt 2024 [BDD+ 24]. These advances
often go hand in hand with the improvement of tools. In particular, the search
for diﬀerential characteristics has been made signiﬁcantly easier in recent years
through automatic search tools based on SAT, SMT, MILP, or CP. The ability
to easily obtain, analyze, or count diﬀerential characteristics with given properties lets the cryptographer focus on novel analysis techniques rather than the
tedious implementation of dedicated search algorithms. However, diﬃcult instances keep challenging these modern tools despite the constant evolution of
techniques [SWW21]; as a result, ﬁnding accurate diﬀerential bounds is still an
open problem for many primitives.
These challenges become even more acute when investigating variants of differential cryptanalysis, such as multiple diﬀerential cryptanalysis [BG11], where
the cryptographer considers not one but many of the possible output diﬀerences.
To this day, it is extremely diﬃcult to evaluate the resistance of a block cipher
to such attacks.
Neural Distinguishers. At CRYPTO 2019, A. Gohr proposed to use deep learning in the context of diﬀerential cryptanalysis [Goh19]. In this work, neural
distinguishers are trained to distinguish the Speck 32 [BSS+ 13] encryption of
two plaintexts related by a ﬁxed input diﬀerence from random pairs. The author shows that a diﬀerential distinguisher using the entire (under the Markov
assumption) Diﬀerential Distribution Table (DDT) of the cipher obtains very
close performance, hinting that neural distinguishers rely on multiple-diﬀerential
properties. However, computing the entire DDT is usually not tractable when
analyzing primitives with states larger than 32 bits. To that extent, neural distinguishers can be seen as a very potent tool to assess the resistance of a cipher
to multiple diﬀerential cryptanalysis, ﬁlling a gap in automatic tools. For instance, for Speck 32, the best 7-rounds diﬀerential characteristics have at best
probability 2−19 [LLJW21], but neural distinguishers can distinguish a single
pair from random with 60% accuracy, indicating stronger multiple-diﬀerential
properties than expected.
Unfortunately, neural distinguishers, like most deep-learning techniques, suffer from explainability issues. We can empirically observe that a neural distinguisher seems to be able to learn some form of the compressed representation
of the DDT, but building such a compressed representation without deep learning is an open problem. Nevertheless, in the absence of a better tool, neural
distinguishers can be used to improve our understanding of multiple diﬀerential
properties and develop new attacks.
Automation. In that spirit, at FSE 2024, the AutoND [BGH+ 23] framework
was introduced. This framework aims at automatically building a neural distinguisher from the implementation of a cipher, providing a bound on the number of rounds for which strong multiple diﬀerential properties exist. The au-

Generic Partial Decryption as Feature Engineering for Neural Distinguishers

3

thors present the tool as akin to libraries such as Tagada [LDLS21], CASCADA [RR22] or CLAASP [BGG+ 24], that, given a cipher implementation,
build distinguishers. Such tools allow cryptographers to focus on developing new
techniques rather than re-implementing already existing methodologies to ﬁnd
distinguishers. Similarly, training a neural distinguisher from scratch is tedious,
and many recent works focused on optimizing the accuracy as much as possible through lengthy hyper-parameters tuning, custom feature engineering, or
dedicated curriculum learning procedures, when the existence of a neural distinguisher for a given number of rounds is, on its own, valuable information.
The initial version of AutoND matches most of the current literature despite
being completely generic and requiring no input from the cryptographer other
than the cipher implementation. On the other hand, dedicated approaches using
primitive-speciﬁc features can result in better distinguishers. For example, in
Simon, given two ciphertexts, their full diﬀerence at the previous round can
be inferred, along with probabilistic information on the diﬀerence two rounds
before. Adding this information to the input of the neural distinguisher can
signiﬁcantly improve its accuracy [LLS+ 24].
It is natural that such dedicated feature engineering provides better distinguishers in comparison to the typical black-box approach to neural cryptanalysis.
For instance, [Dom12] emphasizes that the selection and engineering of features
often have a greater impact on model performance than the choice of algorithm:
“feature engineering is more diﬃcult because it is domain-speciﬁc while learners
can be largely general purpose” (Communications of the ACM, 2012).
Our goal in this research is to ﬁll this gap in a generic way. More speciﬁcally, we add decryption with arbitrary keys to the features used in the AutoND
framework and show that this is suﬃcient to match the state of the art. Using this approach, we preserve deterministic structural properties of the cipher
without needing to speciﬁcally isolate the relevant ones. Concretely, this partial decryption naturally contains some amount of irrelevant information (the
non-deterministic propagations), but it appears to be easy for the neural distinguisher to ﬁlter out useless information. We test this hypothesis on the Simon,
and Simeck ciphers.
Aradi as a Case Study. The block cipher Aradi [GMW24] was published by
NSA researchers without a security analysis, and very few public independent
analyses have been performed (e.g. [BRRT24, BFG+ 24a, ADG24]). We apply our
framework to Aradi and present the ﬁrst practical neural key recovery attack
on 5 rounds, as well its classical equivalent.
1.1

Our Contributions

1. We introduce the automated Generic Partial Decryption pipeline (Section 4),
and obtain competitive neural distinguishers for Simon, Aradi, and Simeck.
Our multi-pair neural distinguishers cover 12 rounds for both Simon and
Simeck with an accuracy of 0.5156, slightly surpassing the state-of-the-art

4

E. Bellini et al.

results reported in [LLS+ 24]. Generic Partial Decryption signiﬁcantly improves the 5-round accuracy for Aradi, increasing it from approximately
60% to 77% in the single-pair setting, and 100% when in the multi-pair
setting.
2. We enhance the explainability of previous results using partial decryption
by comparing the outcomes across four conﬁgurations: i) using a simple
ciphertext pair as a sample, ii) incorporating multiple ciphertext pairs per
sample, iii) increasing the amount of training data, and iv) applying partial
decryption. This approach enables a clear diﬀerentiation of the individual
contributions to the overall accuracy of the neural distinguisher. The results
are reported in Section 5.
For Simon and Simeck, the primary accuracy improvements stem from employing multi-pair neural distinguishers (ii) and using more training data (iii),
while the contribution of partial decryption (iv) is comparatively smaller.
In contrast, for Aradi, the accuracy improvement due to partial decryption (iv) is of a similar magnitude to the gains achieved through multi-pair
usage (ii).
3. Using our 4-rounds neural distinguishers, we present the ﬁrst practical neural
key recovery attack on 5 rounds of Aradi, with data complexity 29 (for 75%
success rate), and time complexity dominated by 240 neural distinguisher
evaluations. We extend this attack to 7 rounds, albeit with non-practical time
complexity. More importantly, for the ﬁrst time, we leverage information
learned from the neural distinguisher to build a classical key recovery attack.
For 5 rounds, this attack has data complexity comparable to the neural one,
and time complexity 242 . These attacks are discussed in Section 6.

2

Preliminaries

In this paper, we use the standard symbols for the boolean operations: ⊕ XOR,
≪ (resp. ≫) α for left (resp. right) rotation by α bits, ⊙ for bitwise AND, ||
for concatenation, and ⊞ and ⊟ for modular addition and subtraction.
2.1

Analyzed Ciphers

Simon and Simeck
Simon [BSS+ 13] and Simeck [YZS+ 15] are families of lightweight block ciphers,
where the state l||r is updated using the round key ki as follows:
li+1 ||ri+1 ← ((li−1 ≪ α) ⊙ (li−1 ≪ β)) ⊕ (li−1 ≪ γ) ⊕ ri−1 ⊕ ki ||li−1
We focus on the variants using a 32-bit state and a 64-bit key, Simon 32/64 and
Simeck 32/64, using rotational constants α = 1, β = 8 and γ = 2 for Simon
32/64, α = 0, β = 5 and γ = 1 for Simeck 32/64.

Generic Partial Decryption as Feature Engineering for Neural Distinguishers

5

Aradi
Aradi [GMW24] is a substitution-permutation network (SPN), taking as input
a 128-bit block and a 256-bit key designed for low-latency applications. The
round function updates the state (w||x||y||z) represented as four 32-bit words
through a column-wise 4-bit S-box π followed by a row-wise linear layer Λi :
Λi (w||x||y||z) := (Li (w)||Li (x)||Li (y)||Li (z)),
Li (s) = Li (sl ; sr ) := (sl ⊕ (sl ≪ αi ) ⊕ (sr ≪ γi )||sr ⊕ (sr ≪ αi ) ⊕ (sl ≪ βi ))
If we denote by τv (s) , the bitwise XOR of s with v, then the Aradi encryption function has the form:
τk16 ◦ (Λ15 ◦ π ◦ τk15 ) ◦ · · · ◦ (Λ1 ◦ π ◦ τk1 ) ◦ (Λ0 ◦ π ◦ τk0 )
where k i denotes the round key, we consider it composed of four words of 32-bits
i
k i = kw
||kxi ||kyi ||kzi corresponding to the four words of the block.
2.2

(Neural) Diﬀerential Cryptanalysis

Diﬀerential cryptanalysis [BS91] is a chosen plaintext attack in which an attacker
analyzes how an injected diﬀerence δ in a plaintext pair (P, P ′ = P ⊕ δ) propagates into the resulting ciphertext pair (C, C ′ ). In diﬀerential cryptanalysis,
the cryptanalyst is interested in ﬁnding diﬀerentials δ, γ such that the equation
F (P ) ⊕ F (P ⊕ δ) = γ holds for many plaintexts P for a primitive F .
Neural Diﬀerential Cryptanalysis. Neural diﬀerential cryptanalysis was introduced at CRYPTO 2019 by Gohr [Goh19]. In this seminal work, a neural distinguisher is trained to classify pairs of ciphertexts as real or random. The real
pairs correspond to the Speck 32/64 encryption of plaintexts P and P ⊕ δ,
where δ = 0x400000 is chosen for its favorable diﬀusion properties, whereas the
random pairs are sampled uniformly at random.
A neural distinguisher is a neural network whose architecture is tuned for
cipher analysis. Concretely, it is a parametrized function fθ composed of aﬃne
layers followed by non-linear activations, mapping the concatenated pair (C0 ∥
(C0 + δ)) to a single score. During supervised training the network receives labelled examples (x, y) with y ∈ {0, 1} indicating the correct class and iteratively
updates θ via stochastic-gradient optimization to minimize a diﬀerentiable loss.
Regularization techniques mitigate overﬁtting – memorizing the training set –
thereby promoting generalization to previously unseen data. The resulting accuracy is evaluated on a separate test set and measures how reliably the trained
model distinguishes truly random data from encrypted pairs for the chosen input diﬀerence δ. Gohr reports test accuracies exceeding 92% for 5 rounds of
Speck, falling to roughly 52% for 8 rounds, illustrating both the potential and
the current limitations of neural distinguishers.
Among the almost 200 papers citing this seminal work, many investigate how
to generalize it to other primitives, often using feature engineering, where the
cryptographer uses his knowledge of the cipher’s structure to craft features that
may be diﬃcult for the N D to learn on its own.

6

2.3

E. Bellini et al.

Feature Engineering

Feature engineering is a fundamental technique in machine learning, focusing
transforming raw data into a more suitable set of features, for instance, through
normalization, encoding, or aggregation, to improve the interpretability and accuracy of the model. In “Feature Engineering for Machine Learning” [ZC18], a
feature is loosely described as “a numeric representation of raw data”.

3

Related Work

Neural Distinguisher Works with Focus on Feature Aggregation. It is commonplace that distinguishers having access to more data tend to perform better;
therefore, multi-pair distinguishers, which are trained on samples containing
more than two ciphertexts (m > 1), have been used in works such as [BGPT21a]
(m = 20, 100), [CSYY22] (m = 8), [HRCF21] (m = 64, 128), and [LLS+ 24]
(m = 8, 16).
However, the use of multi-pair samples has been criticized in [GLN23], where
a combined response score is deﬁned to aggregate the scores produced by a singlepair distinguisher on multiple samples sharing the same label. Using this technique, the authors compare the accuracies of multi-pair (m > 2) distinguishers
with the combination of m single-pair distinguisher scores, and conclude that
“the claimed improvement [of multipair-distinguishers] is at best non-existent
in most cases”. This conclusion relies on a combined response score, which aggregates the scores produced by a single-pair distinguisher on multiple samples
sharing the same label.
Depending on the strictness of the feature engineering deﬁnition, one may
argue that combining multiple samples with the same label into a single sample
does not constitute “feature engineering”. This process does not involve modifying or generating new features but rather aggregates existing data points.
Neural Distinguisher Works with Focus on ⊕-Feature Engineering. In diﬀerential
cryptanalysis, the ciphertext diﬀerence C0 ⊕C1 is the main feature. Many studies
replace concatenated ciphertext pairs (C0 ||C1 ) by their XOR diﬀerence (C0 ⊕C1 ),
such as [BBCD21], Hou et al. [HRCF21], and Yadav et al. [YK21].
Using features based on C0 ⊕ C1 can accelerate training due to the reduced
input length, which simpliﬁes parts of the training process. However, this approach may sacriﬁce some information, often resulting in distinguishers with
lower accuracy compared to those trained on C0 ||C1 . This trade-oﬀ underscores
that feature engineering is closely linked to explainability; deriving optimal input
features is most eﬀective when the learned properties of the neural network are
well understood. Benamira et al. [BGPT21a] examined the properties of pairs
that were correctly classiﬁed, suggesting that Gohr’s neural distinguishers learn
diﬀerential-linear features.

Generic Partial Decryption as Feature Engineering for Neural Distinguishers

7

Neural Distinguisher Works with Focus on Feature Engineering by Partial Decryption. It is often possible to derive truncated information on the diﬀerence
in the previous rounds of a cipher. This additional information, treated as an
additional feature, is trivial given the algorithm of the primitive, but can be
arbitrarily hard in the black-box scenario (e.g., for unkeyed cryptographic permutations). In [BGPT21a], the authors use such partial information in an explainability study. In [BGL+ 22] and [LLS+ 24], the authors improve the accuracy
of neural distinguishers on Simon through similar techniques, using inferred information from one and two rounds ahead.
The authors of [BGPT21a] propose the hypothesis that the N D is able to
infer information on the diﬀerence from 2 rounds ahead; such feature engineering connects naturally with that hypothesis. Based on this observation, Liu et
al. [LRCL23] aim to use partial decryption to improve neural distinguishers:
they use randomly generated subkeys to decrypt one round and develop new
data formats MRMSP (Multiple Rounds Multiple Splicing Pairs) and MSMSD
(Multiple Rounds Multiple Splicing Diﬀerences).
Works with Focus on Generic Tools and Automation. Recent advancements have
focused on developing generic tools and automation for cryptanalysis. Opensource cryptographic libraries, such as Tagada [LDLS21], Cascada [RR22], and
CLAASP [BGG+ 24], aim to enable fully automated cipher analysis, providing
frameworks for analyzing a variety of cryptographic primitives.
Gohr, Leander, and Neumann [GLN23] advocate for the use of neural distinguishers as a generic tool comparable to well-established methods like SAT and
MILP solvers. Their work emphasizes the potential of neural distinguishers to
provide automated, ﬂexible, and eﬃcient solutions to cryptanalytic problems.
At FSE 2024, Bellini et al. [BGH+ 23] introduced AutoND, a cipher-agnostic
neural distinguisher pipeline. AutoND achieves state-of-the-art results across
various cryptographic primitives without requiring human intervention, demonstrating the feasibility of automated pipelines for neural-based cryptanalysis.

4

Design of the Generic Partial Decryption Pipeline

To design our Generic Partial Decryption pipeline, we begin by outlining our
strategy for generic partial decryption in Section 4.1. This strategy enables the
derivation of various potential data formats for the neural distinguisher. From
these, we select four data formats for detailed investigation, as described in Section 4.2.
After determining the input data format, the next critical decisions involve
selecting the input diﬀerence (Section 4.3) and choosing the appropriate neural
network architecture (Section 4.4). Furthermore, we aim to simplify the complex
training pipelines commonly employed in prior works by reducing the amount of
training data required, leading to our streamlined training pipeline design (Section 4.5).

8

E. Bellini et al.

To address concerns regarding the use of multiple pairs, we choose to train
single-pair distinguishers, which can also be evaluated on multiple pairs for comparison with existing literature, as detailed in Section 4.6.
4.1

Our Strategy for Generic Partial Decryption

The speciﬁc features utilized by the N D to make predictions remain largely
unknown. It has been established that these features are mostly diﬀerential in
nature, but a small non-diﬀerential component is shown in [Goh19], and the
presence of diﬀerential-linear features has been suggested in [BGPT21a]. Various
improvements, such as designing new N D architectures or altering the input
data format, have been proposed to enhance N D performance. However, these
enhancements are typically tailored to speciﬁc ciphers or those sharing particular
characteristics, complicating the understanding of how and why the N D models
the cipher characteristics eﬀectively.
In [Goh19], the key recovery strategy uses the response proﬁle of the N D
when the last round is decrypted with an incorrect key. In [BGPT21a], the
authors use a similar technique to build equivalent classical distinguishers. In
addition, they observe that the right part of the Speck 32 state at the previous
round can be computed without knowing the key and propose to use it as an
additional feature for the neural distinguisher. In [BGL+ 22], the authors extend
that notion to the Simon 32/64 cipher family and compare diﬀerent types of
related feature engineering. In [LLS+ 24], the authors consider not only such
deterministic features but also probabilistic ones. Notably, for the Simon-like
ciphers, they build features based on the (deterministically obtained) diﬀerence
at round i − 1 and an approximation of the diﬀerence at round i − 2, obtained
by decrypting the last 2 rounds with subkey 0.
According to [LLS+ 24], this approach signiﬁcantly improves accuracy and
opens avenues for further extensions. They also design N D architectures specifically suited for targeted tasks.
Our primary goal is to develop a general understanding of the features captured by the N D to enhance interpretability. Building on the work in [LLS+ 24],
analyzing the diﬀerentials in earlier rounds could yield better input features for
training N D models. However, if partial decryption is limited to the speciﬁc cipher under analysis, it demands signiﬁcant manual eﬀort from the cryptanalyst,
thereby reducing the suitability of the N D as a generic cryptanalytic tool.
The propagation of a diﬀerential through a cipher typically gains more entropy at each round until full diﬀusion is achieved. Therefore, the diﬀerence at
round i − 1 normally holds more useful information than the diﬀerence at round
i for a distinguisher. Given knowledge of the round function of a cipher, it is
often possible to derive partial information about the diﬀerence in the previous
rounds. For Feistel-like ciphers such as Simon and Speck, part of the previous
round state can be directly obtained. For SPNs, such as Aradi, truncated differential information on the previous round can be recovered (in particular, the
activity pattern of the S-Boxes). In addition, high probability diﬀerential tran-

Generic Partial Decryption as Feature Engineering for Neural Distinguishers

9

sitions, by deﬁnition, hold for a large portion of the key space so that partial
decryption with an incorrect key has a high chance of preserving them.
While such information is trivial for the cryptographer to obtain, it would
be unreasonable to expect the neural distinguisher to learn it on its own. For instance, in the case of Simon, learning the round function to retrieve the previous
round diﬀerence appears diﬃcult for a neural distinguisher. By construction of
Feistel-like ciphers, it is trivial for a cryptographer to retrieve information on the
previous round diﬀerence; on the other hand, if the round function is suﬃciently
complex, it becomes arbitrarily hard for a neural network with black-box access
to do so.
A cryptographer’s natural approach would be to observe which parts of the
previous rounds’ diﬀerences can be recovered with a high probability and use
them only. This is also the approach taken by [LLS+ 24]. On the other hand,
following the goal to limit human input to the mere speciﬁcation of the cipher,
we would like to derive such information automatically in a generic fashion. More
speciﬁcally, we provide partial decryption with a random key as a feature and
let the neural distinguisher ﬁnd the relevant parts and discard the less relevant
ones. Without loss of generality, we use the subkey 0 in our experiments rather
than a random one; intuitively, the exact choice has no impact as long as the
expected Hamming distance with the actual key is n2 .
The number of rounds for which such partial decryption holds information
varies depending on the cipher under consideration; for instance, in [GLN22a],
the authors use information from many previous rounds in their analysis of
KATAN. In this paper, for the sake of conﬁrming the beneﬁt of partial decryption
as a feature, we restrict ourselves to 2 rounds of partial decryption. This captures
the relevant information for most block ciphers while keeping the size of the
dataset and experimental time reasonable. We expect our conclusions to hold
when including the partially decrypted diﬀerence in all rounds, but it may scale
poorly for speciﬁc examples such as KATAN, where dozens of rounds would
make the sample size unpractical.
We extend the concept of Partial Decryption, originally tailored to a speciﬁc
cryptographic primitive, to the broader framework of Generic Partial Decryption. This approach is formalized as follows:
Deﬁnition 1. Let P the plaintext set, C the ciphertext set, K the key space, f
the encryption round function and g the decryption round function such that:
f : P × K → C,

fki (C i−1 ) := f (ki , C i−1 ) = C i

g : C × K → P,

gki (C i ) := g(ki , C i ) = C i−1 .

where ki is the i-th round key, derived from the master key k ∈ K.
Then, we can deﬁne the encryption function and the decryption function as:
Ekn (C 0 ) = fkn−1 ◦ · · · ◦ fk0 (C 0 ) = C n ,

Dkn (C n ) = gk0 ◦ · · · ◦ gkn−1 (C n ) = C 0 ,

such that:
fki ◦ gki (C) = C

and

gki ◦ fki (P ) = P

with i = 1, . . . , n.

10

E. Bellini et al.

Deﬁnition 2. Let (C i , (C ′ )i ) = (Eki (P ), Eki (P ′ )) be a pair of the encryption
function outputs after i rounds. Then, the diﬀerential at the i-th round is:
∆i = Eki (P ) ⊕ Eki (P ′ ) = C i ⊕ (C ′ )i .
We call the 1-Partial Diﬀerential at round i − 1 and the 2-Partial Diﬀerential at round i − 2:


∆˜i−1 = g(0, C i ) ⊕ g(0, (C ′ )i ), ∆˜i−2 = g 0, g(0, C i ) ⊕ g 0, g(0, (C ′ )i ) (1)
where 0 is the round key (i.e. ki = 0). More in general, the k-Partial Diﬀerential is:
∆˜i−k = g(0, g(0, . . . , g(0, C i )) ⊕ g(0, g(0, . . . , g(0, (C ′ )i )) .
|
{z
} |
{z
}
k−times

k−times

In the Generic Partial Decryption technique, the ciphertexts are decrypted
with round key 0. In contrast to the approach in [LLS+ 24], we do not select
which parts of the resulting words are kept. For the remainder of this paper, we
focus exclusively on the application of ∆˜i−1 and ∆˜i−2 .
4.2

Choice of the Data Format

Based on our Generic Partial Decryption strategy, several choices of data formats
are possible. We focus on three speciﬁc formats:
Given an input diﬀerence δ and a pair of plaintexts (P, P ⊕ δ), we denote
ciphertext pairs encrypted with the same key as (C, C ′ ) = (Ekr (P ), Ekr (P ⊕ δ))
for some k ∈ K.
Simple Pair (SP). The ﬁrst data format, SP, is the most commonly used
in the literature; It provides a baseline to evaluate whether adding additional
features can improve training:
(C r , (C ′ )r ).
Last Diﬀerential, Simple Pair, 1-Partial Diﬀerential and 2-Partial
Diﬀerential (LD, SP, 1PD, 2PD). The second format, (LD, SP, 1PD, 2PD),
is closely related to options recently investigated in [LLS+ 24] and incorporates
both ciphertext pairs and partial diﬀerentials:
(∆r , C r , (C ′ )r , ∆˜r−1 , ∆˜r−2 ).
Last Diﬀerential, 1-Partial Diﬀerential and 2-Partial Diﬀerential
(LD, 1PD, 2PD). The third format (LD, 1PD, 2PD) is unique in that it does
not utilize ciphertext pairs, relying solely on diﬀerential values. This format
serves to evaluate the inﬂuence of non-diﬀerential features on the accuracy of
the N D:
(∆r , ∆˜r−1 , ∆˜r−2 ).
It is commonly assumed, following the conclusions of [Goh19], that the ciphertexts themselves are needed to reach optimal accuracy; our last format (LD,
1PD, 2PD) aims at testing this hypothesis.

Generic Partial Decryption as Feature Engineering for Neural Distinguishers

4.3

11

Choice of Input Diﬀerences

The choice of the input diﬀerence used in a neural distinguisher has been shown
to have a signiﬁcant impact on the number of distinguished rounds and the
accuracy [BGPT21b]. A good input diﬀerence for a neural distinguisher is not
necessarily the input diﬀerence for the best classical diﬀerential trail. It suﬃces
to observe that diﬀerential trails for a few rounds have relatively low probability
(e.g., 2−9 for 5 rounds of Speck), whereas neural distinguishers distinguish
based on a single pair. Therefore, the property that they identify has to occur
with signiﬁcantly higher probability than a classical trail, and properties such
as multiple diﬀerentials and diﬀerential-linear play an important role.
It is commonplace in neural distinguishers research to pick an input diﬀerence
with a low Hamming Weight, as it is expected to propagate slowly and enable
longer neural distinguishers. These input diﬀerences are often chosen from intermediate rounds of known trails for the cipher under study, as is the case
in [LLS+ 24].
At FSE 2024, the authors of [BGH+ 23] introduced an evolutionary optimizer
for identifying suitable input diﬀerences for neural distinguishers in a generic
manner. This optimizer operates on the premise that neural distinguishers detect
truncated diﬀerentials from earlier rounds [BGPT21b]. Given this approach, the
existing evolutionary optimizer appears well-suited for application to partially
decrypted input data formats.
4.4

Choice of the Neural Network Architecture

For a comprehensive overview of the neural network architectures for cryptanalysis, we refer readers to the recent systematization of knowledge [GHHP24]. To
motivate our choice of neural network architecture, we provide the following
summary: Multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) have been widely explored as a basic yet lightweight architecture, for example in [BR21, ZZY+ 21, ERP22]. While
MLPs are eﬃcient and easy to implement, their performance is often surpassed
by more advanced architectures. The majority of subsequent works build upon
Gohr’s original neural network design, which has been adapted and reﬁned in
various studies, among others [SZM21, BBCD22, WTZ+ 22]. Although Gohr’s
network can be adapted to new ciphers, this process necessitates careful tuning
of numerous hyper-parameters [GLN23]. Advanced components, such as attention mechanisms [DCC23], LSTMs [BBCD22, SSL+ 22], GoogLeNet-inspired Inception modules [ZWC23, ZLWL23, BLYZ23], and DenseNets [SM23], have also
been explored. While these approaches demonstrate strong results for speciﬁc ciphers, they are often highly cipher-speciﬁc and are accompanied by signiﬁcantly
increased training times.
At FSE 2024, DBitNet was introduced as a “cipher-agnostic” architecture [BGH+ 23]. This architecture avoids cipher-speciﬁc components, employs a
simplistic design, and achieves state-of-the-art results across various primitives
without requiring any modiﬁcations or hyper-parameter adjustments. Given our
goal of developing generic applicability, we focus on two speciﬁc architectures:

12

E. Bellini et al.

DBitNet, which emphasizes generalization across ciphers, and GohrAMS, a
variant of Gohr’s network that incorporates AMSGrad learning rate adaptation
also introduced in [BGH+ 23].
The Neural Networks we consider are Gohr’s original depth-1 network [Goh19]
with AMSGrad learning rate GohrAMS and DBitNet [BGH+ 23]. We will
brieﬂy describe them and refer to their respective publications for more details.
GohrAMS. The Neural Network proposed in [Goh19] is composed of a preprocessing layer in which the input dimension is reshaped, followed by three main
blocks: one slicing Convolutional Layer, n iterations of a Residual Block, and
a Prediction layer. We use the AMSGRAD optimizer [RKK19] instead of the
original learning rate scheduler, as it was shown in [BGH+ 23] to achieve equivalent performance without the need for manual ﬁne-tuning of the original cyclic
learning rate schedule.
DBitNet. DBitNet employs dilated convolutional layers to eﬀectively combine
long-range and short-range dependencies across consecutive convolutional layers. The architecture begins with a dilated convolutional
layer that adapts to the

input size, with an initial dilation rate of dr0 = input2 size − 1 . This is followed
by a layer targeting local interactions with a ﬁxed dilation rate of 2. Each dilated
convolutional layer reduces the neuronal width by approximately half. The alternation between dilated
j convolution
k and standard convolution of neighboring
ri−1 +1
bits continues for dri =
− 1 , with i = 1, . . . , ⌊log2 (input size) − 3⌋.
2
As the neuronal width decreases with each dilated step, the number of ﬁlters
increases incrementally to compensate for the reduced spatial dimensions. This
design ensures a balance between dimensionality reduction and feature extraction, enabling the network to achieve eﬀective representation and generalization
across a variety of ciphers.

4.5

Choice of the Training Pipeline

The training pipeline is known to be determinant when targeting higher rounds,
for which the signal of the distinguisher becomes weaker. In [Goh19], the 8round distinguisher was obtained by retraining the best distinguishers starting
from likely diﬀerences in the middle rounds and increasing the amount of training data by a factor of 100. Similarly, in [LLS+ 24], the 12-round Simon 32/64
distinguisher is built by iteratively retraining the best distinguishers on curated
data, with a dedicated cyclic learning rate. The authors adopt a similar pipeline
for Simeck 32/64.
We aim to achieve similar accuracies without using such dedicated techniques.
In particular, we improve the (already competitive) results we obtain with a
simple training pipeline by applying the simple polishing pipeline deﬁned in
[BGH+ 23].

Generic Partial Decryption as Feature Engineering for Neural Distinguishers

4.6

13

Choice of Single- or Multi-Pair Distinguisher

The [LLS+ 24]’s N Ds are multi-pair Distinguishers trained with samples composed of 8 pairs, increasing the amount of data required for training and testing.
On the other hand, [GLN22b] proposes a method to create a multi-pair distinguisher from a single-pair distinguisher. The algorithm, described below Equation 2, takes as input m ciphertext pairs, either all real or all random, but otherwise assumed to be independent. The N D is assumed to be perfectly calibrated
so that the pairwise scores N D(ci ) = pi can be interpreted as probabilities.
Under these assumptions, the Multi-Pair distinguisher derives the probabilities
Preal = P[all real | observed scores] and Prand = P[all random | observed scores],
aggregates them as the combined response score:
Preal
1
1
=
=
Qm 1−pi .
Prand
Preal + Prand
1+ P
1 + i=1 p
real

(2)

i

We use Equation 2 following [GLN22b]: (i) We validate our N D for each
format on 106 pairs; these datasets are denoted (Xj )j . (ii) We split the dataset
according the labels; (Xj1 ) are the real samples and (Xj0 ) the random ones. Let
N t = #(Xjt ), be the cardinality of the set for t ∈ {0, 1}. (iii) We obtain the
respective scores of the samples as ptj = N D(Xjt ) with t ∈ {0, 1}. (iv) We divide
the corresponding (ptj ) into m subgroups and apply Equation 2. We obtain in
total M t = ⌊N t /m⌋ prediction for t ∈ {0, 1}. (v) Each M t subsample is classiﬁed
based on its combined response score. (vi) The accuracy is given from the ratio
of the right-labeled subsamples over the total subsamples we have.
4.7

Final Pipeline for Generic Partial Decryption

Based on the previously presented considerations, we arrive at the following
pipeline for generic partial decryption: The main algorithm trains a neural distinguisher N D to identify the highest non-random round of a block cipher implementation Ek (·). It adopts a curriculum learning approach, beginning from
an initial round r0 and progressively training the N D on datasets generated for
increasing rounds. The training process continues until the validation accuracy
drops below a predeﬁned threshold (ten standard deviations (10σ) above the
random accuracy of ﬁfty percent).3 Datasets for each round are created using
the chosen data format in the GeneratePDDataset algorithm.
The GeneratePDDataset sub-algorithm constructs a labeled dataset D
for a given round r. It generates N samples through the following steps: (i) Randomly select plaintexts P ∈ P and keys k ∈ K. (ii) Assign a random label
y ∈ {0, 1}. (iii) Compute ciphertext pairs (C, C ′ ) using the r-round encryption
function Ekr (·) on (P, P ⊕ δ0 ). (iv) C, C ′ becomes a random pair of bit string if
3

The expected standard deviation for the accuracy depends on the samples n in the
√
dataset as σ = 1/(2 n) (see, for example [BGH+ 23]); resulting in σ = 0.0005 for
6
Nval = 10 .

14

E. Bellini et al.

Algorithm 1 GenericPartialDecryption(Ek (·))
Input: Oracle access to an r-round block cipher Ek (·), where P ∈ P, k ∈ K, and
C ∈ C such that C = Ek (P ).
Output: Neural distinguisher N D for the highest non-random round.
1: N D ← randomly initialize the neural network (cf. Section 4.4)
2: (r0 , δ0 ) ← Evolutionary Optimizer (select starting round r0 and input diﬀerence
δ0 , cf. Section 4.3)
▷ Execute curriculum learning starting from round r0 (cf. Section 4.5)
3: Aval ← 1.0
4: r ← r0
5: while Aval > 0.50 + 10σ do
6:
Dtrain ← GeneratePDDataset(r, Ntrain , δ0 , dataformat )
7:
Dval ← GeneratePDDataset(r, Nval , δ0 , dataformat )
8:
Train N D on Dtrain
9:
Aval ← accuracy of N D on Dval
▷ Evaluate neural distinguisher
10:
r ←r+1
▷ Progress to next round r
11: end while
12: return N D

Algorithm 2 GeneratePDDataset(r, N , δ0 , dataformat)
Input: Round r, number of samples N , and input diﬀerence δ0 .
Output: Dataset D with N labeled samples for round r.
1: D ← ∅
2: for j = 1, . . . , N do
3:
P, k ← random choice of P ∈ P, k ∈ K
4:
y ← random choice from {0, 1}
▷ Randomly choose a label
5:
(C, C ′ ) ← (Ekr (P ), Ekr (P ⊕ δ0 ))
▷ Generate ciphertext pair
6:
(C, C ′ ) ← random pair of bit strings if y = 0
7:
D ← D ∪ {bit vector according to dataformat }
▷ cf. Section 4.1
8: end for
9: return D

y = 0. The dataset D consists of labeled feature vectors according to the chosen data format, which is subsequently used to train and validate the neural
distinguisher in the main algorithm.
Our parameter choices follow the ones of [BGH+ 23]: All our N Ds are trained
over 40 epochs per round using Ntrain = 107 samples, with a batch size of 5000,
and validated on Nval = 106 samples. Therefore, each of the ﬁve fresh test
sets contains 106 samples drawn with equal class priors; the expected imbalance
per set is ≤ 0.05%. Averaging accuracy over the ﬁve sets reduces any residual
bias to ≤ 0.02%, making the reported mean robust. Our reporting is consistent
with prior works such as [BGH+ 23] and statistically robust. Additionally, we
apply the simple polishing step of [BGH+ 23], where the ﬁnal network undergoes
retraining for three iterations. Each iteration involves repeating the training for
one epoch 100 times on 107 fresh training samples, resulting in a total training
dataset of 100 × 107 = 109 samples per iteration. Since the additional data we

Generic Partial Decryption as Feature Engineering for Neural Distinguishers

15

are using, we decide to apply the polish step just for the round attacked and
not for every step of the staged training. With a batch size of 10,000, we use
the Adam optimizer, gradually decreasing the constant learning rate at each
iteration from 10−4 to 10−5 and ﬁnally to 10−6 . Validation is performed on 107
samples at each iteration.
Our single-pair classiﬁers, with m = 1, are extrapolated to multi-pair distinguishers (m = 8), using the combined response computed as in Section 4.6,
to enable fair comparison with the related work. In both cases, the reported
accuracies are the average on ﬁve fresh testing datasets of size 106 .

5

Neural Distinguishers via Generic Partial Decryption

In the following, we apply our GenericPartialDecryption (cf. Section 4.7)
to Simon, Simeck, and Aradi. Summarizing the results discussed in detail
below, we ﬁnd that for Simon and Simeck, our generic pipeline achieves competitive accuracies compared to the highly specialized approach of [LLS+ 24].
Moreover, we can explain the accuracies obtained by [LLS+ 24] by their distinct
contributions: the use of multiple pairs, additional data, and the actual partial
decryption.
5.1

Simon and Simeck

We perform the training starting from round 8 to round 12 with input diﬀerence:
0x400 and 0x80 respectively for Simon 32/64 and Simeck 32/64 (Table 1) (for
the choice of the input diﬀerences cf. Section 4.3). In each table, we present our
results for GenericPartialDecryption applied to Simon in the DBitNetcolumns alongside the results of [LLS+ 24], which exploit speciﬁc features of the
Simon and Simeck ciphers.
Simon. For Simon (Table 1), in the simple data format (C, C ′ ), DBitNet
distinguishes better than random up to 11 rounds; in the multi-pair setting
(m = 8), the 11 rounds accuracy increases by 4 points, and the 12 rounds
accuracy remains borderline, at 2.6σ above randomness. Applying the simple
polishing step (cf. Section 4.7) brings the accuracy to 0.5097 (19σ above random).
These results indicate that a 12-round distinguisher for Simon can be achieved
with the simple data format by combining i) multi-pair evaluation and ii) a
simple polishing step with additional training data.
The remaining gap with the 12-rounds accuracy 0.5152 from [LLS+ 24] is ﬁlled
by feature engineering: DBitNet, combined with the GenericPartialDecryption, achieves slightly higher accuracy (0.5153) using the same feature
engineering technique, and up to 0.5156 under the (LD, 1PD, 2PD) format.
Simeck. For Simeck (Table 1), we observe similar results, unsurprisingly, due
to the similarities of the two primitives. However, the key schedule diﬀerence
between the two primitives does not seem to impact the accuracy of the N D.

16

E. Bellini et al.

Table 1. Results for Simon 32/64, Simeck 32/64, and Aradi. Simon: (†) See Section 4.5; (a) Refer to [LLS+ 24]; (b) The N D is the same of the case m = 1 but we
change the evaluation step according Section 4.6. Simeck: (†) See Section 4.5; (a) Refer
to [LLS+ 24]; (b) The N D is the same as the case m = 1 but we change the evaluation
step according Section 4.6. Aradi: (a) The N D is the same of the case m = 1 but we
change the evaluation step according Section 4.6.
[LLS+ 24]
DBitNet
DBitNet
DBitNet
˜r−2
˜r−1 , ∆
˜r−2 ) (∆r , ∆
˜r−1 , ∆
˜r−2 )
(C, C ′ )
(∆r , C, C ′ , ∆r−1
(∆r , C, C ′ , ∆
R , ∆R )
Simon32/64
m=8
m=1 m=8 m=8 m=1 m=8 m=8 m=1 m=8 m=8
Round
adv.
Simple Simple Pol. Simple Simple Pol. Simple Simple Pol.
8
9
10
11
12

0.9176
0.6975
0.5609
0.5152

0.8367 0.9991
0.8417 0.9993
0.8408 0.9993
0.6556 0.8892
0.6584 0.8938
0.6580 0.8933
0.5626 0.6761
0.5655 0.6859
0.5646 0.6827
0.5150 0.5479
0.5177 0.5567
0.5173 0.5561
0.5004 0.5013 0.5097 0.5022 0.5077 0.5153 0.5023 0.5064 0.5156

[LLS+ 24]
DBitNet
DBitNet
DBitNet
˜r−2
˜r−1 , ∆
˜r−2 ) (∆r , ∆
˜r−1 , ∆
˜r−2 )
(C, C ′ )
(∆r , C, C ′ , ∆r−1
(∆r , C, C ′ , ∆
R , ∆R )
Simeck32/64
m=8
m=1 m=8 m=8 m=1 m=8 m=8 m=1 m=8 m=8
Round
adv.
Simple Simple Pol. Simple Simple Pol. Simple Simple Pol.
8
9
10
11
12

0.9952
0.7354
0.5646
0.5146

0.8470 0.9998
0.9022 1.0000
0.9025 1.0000
0.6819 0.9276
0.7075 0.9562
0.7074 0.9564
0.5601 0.6832
0.5700 0.7127
0.5702 0.7133
0.5133 0.5472
0.5168 0.5595
0.5170 0.5612
0.5007 0.5028 0.5109 0.5026 0.5100 0.5155 0.5028 0.5090 0.5156

DBitNet
GohrAMS
DBitNet
DBitNet
˜r−1 , ∆
˜r−2 ) (∆r , C, C ′ , ∆
˜r−1 , ∆
˜r−2 )
˜r−1 , ∆
˜r−2 )
(C, C ′ )
(∆r , C, C ′ , ∆
(∆r , ∆
Aradi m = 1 m = 8 m = 8 m = 1 m = 8 m = 8 m = 1 m = 8 m = 8 m = 1 m = 8 m = 8
Round Simple Simple Pol. Simple Simple Pol. Simple Simple Pol. Simple Simple Pol.
3
4
5

1.0000 1.0000
1.0000 1.0000
1.0000 1.0000
1.0000 1.0000
1.0000 1.0000
1.0000 1.0000
1.0000 1.0000
1.0000 1.0000
0.5974 0.7533 0.7634 0.7732 0.9984 0.9988 0.7733 0.9988 0.9988 0.7721 0.9988 0.9988

More importantly, these results show that, contrary to the common-held belief,
the presence of the ciphertexts is not always mandatory to reach optimal accuracy; indeed, our best performing format for Simon and Speck, (LD, 1PD, 2PD),
only uses diﬀerences.
5.2

Aradi

We train the neural distinguisher (N D) for Aradi from round 3 to round 5 using
the input diﬀerence 0x1000000000000000000000. The distinguishers ( Table 1)
reach 100% accuracy on 3 and 4 rounds, while the best diﬀerential trail over
4 rounds has probability 2−32 . Furthermore, with the input diﬀerence we used,
the best diﬀerential trail has probability 2−60 (found using CLAASP [BGG+ 24]).
Another previous work [BFG+ 24b, Table 10] achieves 5-round accuracy of 0.5954.
This accuracy is close to our results in the (C, C ′ ) scenario. In the multi-sample
and partially decrypted scenario, we signiﬁcantly surpass these results, reaching
accuracies of up to almost perfect accuracy in round 5.

Generic Partial Decryption as Feature Engineering for Neural Distinguishers

17

On 5 rounds, the addition of features derived from partial decryption has
a considerable positive impact on the accuracy, with DBitNet going from just
under 60% accuracy in the (C, C ′ ) format to around 77% with the composite
format (∆r , C, C ′ , ∆˜r−1 , ∆˜r−2 ). GohrAMS reaches a similar performance. In
contrast, the best 5-round diﬀerential trail has probability 2−50 ; if the input
diﬀerence is restricted to the one used by our distinguisher, the best trail has
probability 2−94 .
On the other hand, we can observe deterministic truncated diﬀerential properties when the input diﬀerence is in a single S-Box position. Namely, by construction of the linear layer, such an input diﬀerence propagates to 3 non-zero
diﬀerences after one round with probability 1. At round 2, the truncated propagation is still deterministic, and 9 S-Box positions are active. At round 3, the
activity pattern of 22 S-Boxes is non-deterministic, while 10 S-Boxes have a 0
diﬀerence with probability 1. This 40-bit property is suﬃcient to build a strong
distinguisher and can be directly checked from the round 4 diﬀerence. Indeed,
when inverting the last round, the round 4 key addition does not change the
diﬀerence, and the linear layer propagates it in a deterministic way. The input
diﬀerence before and after the inversion of S-boxes depends on the round 4 key,
but we are only interested in whether they have a zero diﬀerence. For bijective
S-Boxes, a zero input diﬀerence always goes to a 0 output diﬀerence and vice
versa so that we can observe which S-Box positions are 0 at round 3. Therefore,
giving the partial decryption to the neural distinguisher directly gives it a strong
property to observe, which it otherwise would have to learn.

6

Key Recovery Attack via Generic Partial Decryption

6.1

Neural Key Recovery in the Literature

In [Goh19], neural distinguishers are used to mount a key recovery attack. The
attack divides the cipher into three parts: the Prepended nPP rounds, the Neural
Distinguisher on nND rounds, and the Key Recovery part on nKR rounds.
The Basic Attack. In its most basic form, Gohr’s neural key recovery [Goh19]
targets nND +nKR rounds. The attacker queries the encryption of plaintext pairs
with diﬀerence δ. For each candidate subkey in the last nKR rounds, the pairs are
decrypted and submitted to the neural distinguisher. Based on the wrong key
randomization hypothesis, the distribution induced by incorrect key decryption
is assumed to diﬀer from the distribution learned by the neural distinguisher.
Wrong Key Response Proﬁle. Decryption with an incorrect key does not, in
practice, induce a random distribution of the pairs for Speck 32. The author
of [Goh19] observes that the XOR diﬀerence between a wrong key and the actual
key inﬂuences the scoring output by the neural distinguisher. A wrong key response proﬁle quantiﬁes, for each key diﬀerence value, the expected distribution
of the output of the neural distinguisher. This information helps greatly reduce
the number of examined candidate keys, as it selects which direction to walk to
get closer to the correct key.

18

E. Bellini et al.

Reaching More Rounds. If there exists an input diﬀerence γ, which has probability p to propagate to the N D input diﬀerence δ after nPP rounds, then a pair
with input diﬀerence γ encrypted for nPP + nND rounds should be classiﬁed as
real by the nND rounds neural distinguisher with probability p·TPR+(1−p)·FPR,
where TPR and FPR denote respectively the true positive and false positive rates
of the neural distinguisher. For a random permutation, this probability simply
becomes FPR. The number of positive predictions can, therefore, be used as a
distinguisher for nPP + nND rounds. However, the number of pairs required to
reach over 50% conﬁdence with the above distinguisher grows with the square
of the inverse of p; to counter that eﬀect, the author of [Goh19] proposes to use
Probabilistic Neutral Bits (PNBs) to build structures within which all the pairs
are expected to behave similarly in the ﬁrst nPP rounds.
Deﬁnition 3. (Probabilistic Neutral Bit) Let πk be a keyed permutation, and
γ → δ be a diﬀerential for πk . A bit i is a Neutral Bit for γ, δ if it does not
inﬂuence the diﬀerential. Let x∗i denote plaintext x with bit position i ﬂipped;
if probπk (x∗i ) ⊕ πk (x∗i ⊕ γ) = δ|πk (x) ⊕ πk (x ⊕ γ) = δ = 1, then bit i is neutral.
More generally, i is a Probabilistic Neutral Bit with probability p if
P[πk (x∗i ) ⊕ πk (x∗i ⊕ γ) = δ|πk (x) ⊕ πk (x ⊕ γ) = δ] = p.
Attacking Large Round Keys. The above attack requires iterating over all possible key error bit vectors. Therefore, little attention has been given to neural
key recovery on block ciphers with larger round keys. The main result for that
setting [CBSY22] proposes to use diﬀerent neural distinguishers for diﬀerent
subsets of the key bits. These subsets are identiﬁed through the bit sensitivity
test [CSY23], which identiﬁes informative bits of the ciphertext w.r.t the classiﬁcation by the neural distinguisher. A key recovery using this technique focuses
on key bits in the last round key that have a high impact on the corresponding
ciphertext bits after partial decryption.

6.2

Neural Key Recovery on Aradi

Aradi uses large (128-bit) round keys. Therefore, we build an alternative key
recovery strategy using probabilistic neutral bits in the decryption direction.
This technique was introduced by Aumasson for diﬀerential-linear cryptanalysis
against ChaCha [AFK+ 08]. To distinguish these bits from the neutral bits used in
the encryption direction, we call them Probabilistic Neutral Key Bits (PNKBs).
PNKBs and How to Find Them. A bit of the last round key is said to be a
PKNB when, if it is incorrectly guessed, it does not change the prediction of
the neural distinguisher for the corresponding partially decrypted ciphertext
pair. In [AFK+ 08], probabilistic neutral bits are deﬁned as follows for a function
f (k, W ) of an unknown partial key k and known information W :

Generic Partial Decryption as Feature Engineering for Neural Distinguishers

19

Deﬁnition 4. Probabilistic Neutral Key Bit (PNKB) The neutrality measure of
the key bit ki with respect to the function f (k, W ) is deﬁned as γi , where
P[f (k, W ) = f (ki∗ , W )] =

1
· (1 + γi )
2

is the probability (over all k and W ) that complementing the key bit ki does not
change the output of f (k, W ).
In our analysis, given an r+1-round ciphertext pair, we decrypt the last round
k
(C0 ) and
using a candidate key k and build the candidate decryptions C0∗ = gr+1
k
∗
C1 = gr+1 (C1 ), adapting the notations introduced in Deﬁnition 1; from these,
we set W = (∆r∗ , ∆˜r−1∗ , ∆˜r−2∗ ), and set f (k, W ) = N D(W ). A PNKB is a key
bit that does not change the output of the neural distinguisher when guessed
incorrectly. To test whether a key bit b is a PNKB, we build a dataset DPNKB ,
in which the random samples are deﬁned as usual, and the real samples are
kb
kb
(C0 ) and C1∗ = gr+1
(C1 ), where k b is the correct round
built from C0∗ = gr+1
key k with bit b randomized. If the bit is indeed a PNKB, then the accuracy
of the neural distinguisher on this modiﬁed dataset is equivalent to its accuracy
on a normal r round dataset. Preliminary experiments show that some key bits
are naturally almost neutral in our trained N D for Aradi. However, building a
practical attack requires a suﬃcient number of PNKBs, with neutrality measure
as high as possible. We, therefore, retrain our neural distinguishers to reduce
their sensitivity to changes in the PNKBs. More speciﬁcally, starting from an
empty set of PNKBs, and for each last round key bit position i, we retrain our
N D on the corresponding DPNKB dataset. If the accuracy remains suﬃciently
close to the basic N D, we keep bit i as neutral and proceed to the next. If not,
bit i is re-set to its correct value, and the next bit is investigated. At the end
of this procedure, we have a set of PNKBs, as well as the dual set of important
key bits.
A Simple 5-rounds Key Recovery. The simplest version of our attack targets
5 rounds of Aradi and uses a 4-round neural distinguisher, trained on input
diﬀerence 0x1000000000000000000000. This neural distinguisher has over 99%
accuracy, which enables low data complexity key recoveries. Furthermore, it
exhibits a set of 88 PNKBs, for last round key indices 0, 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12,
14, 15, 17, 18, 19, 21, 22, 23, 26, 27, 28, 30, 31, 32, 35, 36, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44,
46, 47, 49, 50, 51, 53, 54, 55, 58, 59, 60, 62, 63, 64, 67, 68, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75,
76, 78, 79, 81, 82, 83, 85, 86, 87, 90, 91, 92, 94, 95, 96, 99, 100, 103, 104, 105,
106, 107, 108, 110, 111, 113, 114, 115, 117, 118, 119, 122, 123, 124, 126, 127.
In addition, we use a set of 16 rotationally equivalent neural distinguishers for
rotations in the weight 1 input diﬀerence in the leftmost 16 bits of word x of the
state. The distinguishers have all equivalent accuracies and map to equivalent
rotated PKNBs. When viewing the cipher state as 4 rows of 32 bits, considered
as a left and right part, each composed of 4 rows of 16 bits, a rotation of r
positions in the input diﬀerence results in a rotation of r positions in the left
and right parts independently. The basic key recovery strategy is to ﬁx the 88

20

E. Bellini et al.

PNKBs to a random value and attack the remaining 40 non-neutral key bits.
Using 16 neural distinguishers for the corresponding 16 rotated input diﬀerences
and PNKB sets, we iteratively recover the round 5 subkey.
In our attack, we start by recovering the 40 key bits associated with one of
our neural distinguishers. Some of these key bits have a very strong signal in
that the scoring output by the neural distinguisher for the corresponding key
guesses is consistently high; on the other hand, some key bits do not exhibit
such a clear behavior. We, therefore, assign a conﬁdence score to each of the
guessed key bits and only consider a bit valid when this score is high enough.
We then iteratively select a new input diﬀerence and its set of key bits to attack.
The choice of the next input diﬀerence is guided by the amount of corresponding
leftover bits, bits which are part of the input diﬀerence’s PNKBs and not part
of the valid bits set. To keep the attack practical, we need the set of attacked
bits to be as small as possible, so we aim for 20 or fewer leftover bits. The attack
continues until the set of valid bits has size 128 (i.e., the entire last round key is
recovered), or no new bit is recovered for a threshold number of iterations. The
remaining 128 bits of the key can be recovered using a similar strategy with a
3-round neural distinguisher. In order to experimentally validate this practical
key recovery, the neural network evaluation for 240 potential key candidates was
an obstacle. However, the PNKB sets for diﬀerent distinguishers overlap so that
once a small number of key bits have been recovered, it is usually possible to
ﬁnd an overlapping set with less than 20 key bits to enumerate. We, therefore,
assume preliminary knowledge of 30 key bits in the ﬁrst explored set for practical
validation and successfully recover the remaining 98 bits of the round 5 key. This
attack was performed 25 times, each time with a fresh random key and a random
selection of 30 known key bits, and successfully recovered the entire last round
key 21 times, with a maximum data complexity of 520 pairs, slightly over 29
chosen plaintexts. More speciﬁcally, each enumeration of a non-neutral key bits
set is tested against 10 pairs, and the maximum number of iterations of the
enumeration algorithm was 52 (with some PNKB sets attacked several times
until a high enough conﬁdence is achieved). It is likely that the data complexity
and success rate of the attack can be further improved, for instance by using more
pairs at each iteration (therefore increasing the conﬁdence in the corresponding
guesses and reducing the number of iterations), or with a smarter exploration of
the connections between overlapping PNKB sets.
Extending the Attack. Our attack can be extended to 7 rounds, at the cost of
non-practical time complexity, by having the distinguisher start from round 2
instead of round 0. This requires retraining a neural distinguisher, as the rotational constants of rounds 2 to 6 are not the same as the ones from rounds 0
to 4. Nonetheless, equivalent distinguishers can be built from round 2, which
is consistent with observations on the deterministic propagation of input diﬀerences through the cipher. In addition, we observe that due to the SPN structure
of Aradi, the accuracy of neural distinguishers and diﬀerential propagation are
similar regardless of the row of the Hamming weight 1 input diﬀerence (when we
consider the Aradi state as 4 rows). Furthermore, truncated diﬀerences within

Generic Partial Decryption as Feature Engineering for Neural Distinguishers

21

a single row share similar properties, meaning that when prepending rounds,
we do not need to target a speciﬁc bit but a column and beneﬁt from a differential eﬀect. For Aradi, the best 2-round diﬀerential trails that end with a
single-column output diﬀerence have probability 2−24 . We focus, without loss
of generality, on the diﬀerential transition from (0xca10314, 0xca10314, 0, 0) to
an output diﬀerence where a single active S-Box is present in column 15. This
truncated diﬀerential transition holds with approximate probability 220 (as experimentally veriﬁed). We experimentally ﬁnd a set of 76 neutral bits for this
diﬀerential transition, which may enable longer key recoveries. For a 7-round
attack, however, we can use signiﬁcantly less. Remember that our 4-round distinguishers have over 99% accuracy, so the response proﬁle for pairs that do not
follow the diﬀerential is very distinct. Therefore, in the attack, we can build small
structures of 28 pairs; we need on average 220 structures to ﬁnd one that follows
the 2-round diﬀerential. Within each structure, we test one pair at a time by
testing the corresponding 40 key-bit candidates; the response proﬁle of the correct structure is expected to be the highest. From there, the attack proceeds as
in the previous section, using diﬀerent neural distinguishers for diﬀerent key-bit
subsets. We expect that with 28 pairs per structure, the key recovery procedure
will require a single pass for each of the input diﬀerences, resulting in a worsecase data complexity of 220 · 28 · 16 = 232 . The time complexity is on average
220 neural distinguisher evaluations per pair, but dominated by the initial 240
neural evaluations for the ﬁrst PKNB set, yielding a total time complexity of
272 N D evaluations.
From Neural to Classical Key Recovery. The neural distinguisher ﬁndings are
helpful in identifying that there is a relevant property for 4 and 5 rounds. However, for cryptographers, knowing there is an attack is not suﬃcient, and understanding it is crucial. We therefore propose to use the N D results to mount a
classical key recovery. For the 4-round distinguishers, the key property is that a
set of 40 bits (10 columns) in round 3 is always 0 due to the slow diﬀusion of the
single active nibble in the input diﬀerence. The activity pattern of the S-Boxes
is preserved by one round of partial decryption so that decrypting the 4-round
pair with a random key is suﬃcient to observe the 40 zeros pattern for a real
pair. On the other hand, for random pairs, it occurs with probability 2−40 , so
that the corresponding distinguisher is highly accurate: its true positive rate is
1 (as all real pairs follow this pattern), and its false positive rate is 1-2−40 .
Transforming this distinguisher into a 5-round key recovery requires identifying the key bits involved in the computation of the 40 ﬁxed positions in round
3. Each of these columns depends, by the construction of the linear layer, on
3 columns of the round 4 diﬀerence. Since we are only interested in the activity pattern and not the actual value of the S-Box inputs, we do not need the
corresponding round 4 key. On the other hand, each of these round 4 columns
depends on 3 columns of round 5, for which we do need to obtain the key to get
the correct values for the columns of round 3. More speciﬁcally, there are 10 sets
of 36 key bits, each corresponding to one column, to be recovered.

22

E. Bellini et al.

The probability for an incorrect key guess to result in the expected 4-zeros
column pattern is 2−4 ; after analyzing N pairs, the probability for a wrong key
guess to appear for all N pairs is 2−4·N . This ﬁgure matches the neural key
recovery experiments, where 10 pairs were suﬃcient for each key guessing phase.
The data complexity of the corresponding key recovery is 10 pairs, and the time
complexity, 236 · 4 · 10, rounded up to 242 . In comparison, the ﬁrst step of the
neural key recovery of the previous section requires 10·240 N D evaluations, with
each N D evaluation accounting for signiﬁcantly more than a simple operation,
resulting in higher time complexity. On the other hand, the neural key recovery
may perform similarly, or better, if retrained for the subsets of 36 non-neutral key
bits used in the classical attack; however, we did not perform such experiments,
as we ﬁnd the classical attack more satisfying.

7

Conclusion

In this paper, we recognize neural distinguishers as a useful tool for identifying
diﬀerential properties that do not immediately appear from classical diﬀerential
characteristics. We, therefore, aim to make their application to new primitives
easier, building on the generic AutoND framework and making it more competitive with dedicated approaches. In particular, we notice that recent works,
such as [LLS+ 24], break the classical black-box model (where the neural distinguisher is only given ciphertext pairs) to include information on the structure
of the cipher, by including features derived from the deterministic (and sometimes probabilistic) propagation of the diﬀerence to the previous rounds. We
propose Generic Partial Decryption as a way to include such features automatically, and evaluate the resulting framework on Simon, Simeck, and Aradi. By
separating feature engineering from other techniques, such as multiple-pair distinguishers, we observe that the addition of these features is not determinant to
the advantage of [LLS+ 24] over the AutoND framework, but that the multi-pair
aspect plays the most important role (even though feature engineering helps ﬁll
a small gap between the two techniques). In addition, we propose the ﬁrst neural key recovery on 5 rounds of Aradi, with practical complexity, and propose
an equivalent classical attack, informed by the biases exhibited by the neural
distinguisher, with better complexity. In future work, it would be interesting
to observe how much similar insight can be leveraged to improve classical attacks. On the neural distinguisher side, it appears that the addition of features
sometimes lowers the accuracy, possibly due to larger inputs. Addressing this
limitation would help further improve automated neural cryptanalysis, in turn
improving our understanding of multiple diﬀerential properties.

References
ADG24.

Roberto Avanzi, Orr Dunkelman, and Shibam Ghosh. A note on ARADI
and LLAMA. IACR Cryptol. ePrint Arch., page 1328, 2024.

Generic Partial Decryption as Feature Engineering for Neural Distinguishers
AFK+ 08.

23

Jean-Philippe Aumasson, Simon Fischer, Shahram Khazaei, Willi Meier,
and Christian Rechberger. New features of latin dances: Analysis of salsa,
chacha, and rumba. In Kaisa Nyberg, editor, Fast Software Encryption,
15th International Workshop, FSE 2008, Lausanne, Switzerland, February 10-13, 2008, Revised Selected Papers, volume 5086 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 470–488. Springer, 2008.
BBCD21. Anubhab Baksi, Jakub Breier, Yi Chen, and Xiaoyang Dong. Machine
learning assisted diﬀerential distinguishers for lightweight ciphers. In Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition, DATE 2021,
Grenoble, France, February 1-5, 2021, pages 176–181. IEEE, 2021.
BBCD22. Anubhab Baksi, Jakub Breier, Yi Chen, and Xiaoyang Dong. Machine
learning-assisted diﬀerential distinguishers for lightweight ciphers. Classical
and Physical Security of Symmetric Key Cryptographic Algorithms, pages
141–162, 2022.
BDD+ 24. Christina Boura, Nicolas David, Patrick Derbez, Rachelle Heim Boissier,
and María Naya-Plasencia. A generic algorithm for eﬃcient key recovery
in diﬀerential attacks – and its associated tool. In Marc Joye and Gregor
Leander, editors, Advances in Cryptology – EUROCRYPT 2024, pages 217–
248, Cham, 2024. Springer Nature Switzerland.
BFG+ 24a. Emanuele Bellini, Mattia Formenti, David Gérault, Juan Grados, Anna
Hambitzer, Yun Ju Huang, Paul Huynh, Mohamed Rachidi, Raghvendra
Rohit, and Sharwan K. Tiwari. Claasping ARADI: automated analysis of
the ARADI block cipher. IACR Cryptol. ePrint Arch., page 1324, 2024.
BFG+ 24b. Emanuele Bellini, Mattia Formenti, David Gérault, Juan Grados, Anna
Hambitzer, Yun Ju Huang, Paul Huynh, Mohamed Rachidi, Raghvendra
Rohit, and Sharwan K. Tiwari. CLAASPing ARADI: Automated analysis
of the ARADI block cipher. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2024/1324,
2024.
BG11.
Céline Blondeau and Benoît Gérard. Multiple diﬀerential cryptanalysis:
Theory and practice. In Fast Software Encryption - 18th International
Workshop, FSE 2011, volume 6733 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
page 35. Springer, 2011.
BGG+ 24. Emanuele Bellini, David Gerault, Juan Grados, Yun Ju Huang, Rusydi
Makarim, Mohamed Rachidi, and Sharwan Tiwari. CLAASP: A cryptographic library for the automated analysis of symmetric primitives. In
Selected Areas in Cryptography SAC 2023: 30th International Conference,
Fredericton, Canada, August 1418, 2023, Revised Selected Papers, page
387408, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2024. Springer-Verlag.
BGH+ 23. E Bellini, D Gerault, A Hambitzer, M Rossi, et al. A cipher-agnostic
neural training pipeline with automated ﬁnding of good input diﬀerences.
IACR TRANSACTION ON SYMMETRIC CRYPTOLOGY, 2023(3):184–
212, 2023.
BGL+ 22. Zhenzhen Bao, Jian Guo, Meicheng Liu, Li Ma, and Yi Tu. Enhancing
diﬀerential-neural cryptanalysis. In International Conference on the Theory
and Application of Cryptology and Information Security, pages 318–347.
Springer, 2022.
BGPT21a. Adrien Benamira, David Gérault, Thomas Peyrin, and Quan Quan Tan.
A deeper look at machine learning-based cryptanalysis. In Anne Canteaut
and François-Xavier Standaert, editors, Advances in Cryptology - EUROCRYPT 2021 - 40th Annual International Conference on the Theory and

24

E. Bellini et al.

Applications of Cryptographic Techniques, Zagreb, Croatia, October 17-21,
2021, Proceedings, Part I, volume 12696 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 805–835. Springer, 2021.
BGPT21b. Adrien Benamira, David Gerault, Thomas Peyrin, and Quan Quan Tan.
A deeper look at machine learning-based cryptanalysis. In Advances in
Cryptology–EUROCRYPT 2021: 40th Annual International Conference on
the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques, Zagreb, Croatia,
October 17–21, 2021, Proceedings, Part I 40, pages 805–835. Springer, 2021.
BLYZ23. Zhenzhen Bao, Jinyu Lu, Yiran Yao, and Liu Zhang. More insight on deep
learning-aided cryptanalysis. In International Conference on the Theory
and Application of Cryptology and Information Security, pages 436–467.
Springer, 2023.
BR21.
Emanuele Bellini and Matteo Rossi. Performance comparison between deep
learning-based and conventional cryptographic distinguishers. In Intelligent Computing: Proceedings of the 2021 Computing Conference, Volume
3, pages 681–701. Springer, 2021.
BRRT24. Emanuele Bellini, Mohamed Rachidi, Raghvendra Rohit, and Sharwan K.
Tiwari. Mind the composition of Toﬀoli gates: Structural algebraic distinguishers of ARADI. IACR Cryptol. ePrint Arch., page 1559, 2024.
BS91.
Eli Biham and Adi Shamir. Diﬀerential cryptanalysis of DES-like cryptosystems. J. Cryptology, 4:3–72, 1991.
BSS+ 13. Ray Beaulieu, Douglas Shors, Jason Smith, Stefan Treatman-Clark, Bryan
Weeks, and Louis Wingers. The SIMON and SPECK families of lightweight
block ciphers. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2013/404, 2013.
CBSY22. Yi Chen, Zhenzhen Bao, Yantian Shen, and Hongbo Yu. A deep learning
aided key recovery framework for large-state block ciphers. Cryptology
ePrint Archive, 2022.
Cop94.
D. Coppersmith. The Data Encryption Standard (DES) and its strength
against attacks. IBM J. Res. Dev., 38(3):243250, May 1994.
CSY23.
Yi Chen, Yantian Shen, and Hongbo Yu. Neural-aided statistical attack
for cryptanalysis. The Computer Journal, 66:2480–2498, 2023.
CSYY22. Yi Chen, Yantian Shen, Hongbo Yu, and Sitong Yuan. A New Neural Distinguisher Considering Features Derived From Multiple Ciphertext Pairs.
The Computer Journal, 03 2022.
DCC23.
Haoran Deng, Xianghui Cao, and Yu Cheng. Attention in diﬀerential cryptanalysis on lightweight block cipher SPECK. In 2023 20th Annual International Conference on Privacy, Security and Trust (PST), pages 1–9. IEEE,
2023.
Dom12.
Pedro Domingos. A few useful things to know about machine learning.
Communications of the ACM, 55(10):78–87, 2012. https://dl.acm.org/
doi/pdf/10.1145/2347736.2347755.
ERP22.
Amirhossein Ebrahimi, Francesco Regazzoni, and Paolo Palmieri. Reducing
the cost of machine learning diﬀerential attacks using bit selection and a
partial ML-distinguisher. In International Symposium on Foundations and
Practice of Security, pages 123–141. Springer, 2022.
GHHP24. David Gerault, Anna Hambitzer, Moritz Huppert, and Stjepan Picek. Sok:
5 years of neural diﬀerential cryptanalysis. Cryptology ePrint Archive, 2024.
GLN22a. Aron Gohr, Gregor Leander, and Patrick Neumann. An assessment of
diﬀerential-neural distinguishers. Cryptology ePrint Archive, 2022.

Generic Partial Decryption as Feature Engineering for Neural Distinguishers
GLN22b.

GLN23.

GMW24.

Goh19.

HRCF21.

LDLS21.

LLJW21.

LLS+ 24.

LRCL23.

RKK19.
RR22.

SM23.

SSL+ 22.

SWW21.

SZM21.

25

Aron Gohr, Gregor Leander, and Patrick Neumann. An assessment
of diﬀerential-neural distinguishers. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper
2022/1521, 2022. https://eprint.iacr.org/2022/1521.
Aron Gohr, Gregor Leander, and Patrick Neumann. An assessment of
diﬀerential-neural distinguishers. In AICrypt23 - 3RD Workshop on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Cryptography, 2023.
Patricia Greene, Mark Motley, and Bryan Weeks. ARADI and LLAMA:
Low-latency cryptography for memory encryption. Cryptology ePrint
Archive, Paper 2024/1240, 2024.
Aron Gohr. Improving attacks on round-reduced Speck32/64 using deep
learning. In Advances in Cryptology–CRYPTO 2019: 39th Annual International Cryptology Conference, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, August 18–22,
2019, Proceedings, Part II 39, pages 150–179. Springer, 2019.
ZeZhou Hou, JiongJiong Ren, ShaoZhen Chen, and AnMin Fu. Improve
Neural Distinguishers of SIMON and SPECK. Sec. and Commun. Netw.,
2021, jan 2021.
Luc Libralesso, François Delobel, Pascal Lafourcade, and Christine Solnon. Automatic Generation of Declarative Models For Diﬀerential Cryptanalysis. In Laurent D. Michel, editor, 27th International Conference on
Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming, CP 2021, Montpellier,
France (Virtual Conference), October 25-29, 2021, volume 210 of LIPIcs,
pages 40:1–40:18. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2021.
Zhengbin Liu, Yongqiang Li, Lin Jiao, and Mingsheng Wang. A new
method for searching optimal diﬀerential and linear trails in ARX ciphers.
IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, 67(2):1054–1068, 2021.
Jinyu Lu, Guoqiang Liu, Bing Sun, Chao Li, and Li Liu. Improved (relatedkey) diﬀerential-based neural distinguishers for SIMON and SIMECK block
ciphers. The Computer Journal, 67(2):537–547, 2024.
JiaShuo Liu, JiongJiong Ren, ShaoZhen Chen, and ManMan Li. Improved
neural distinguishers with multi-round and multi-splicing construction.
Journal of Information Security and Applications, 74:103461, 2023.
Sashank J. Reddi, Satyen Kale, and Sanjiv Kumar. On the convergence of
adam and beyond, 2019.
Adrián Ranea and Vincent Rijmen. Characteristic automated search of
cryptographic algorithms for distinguishing attacks (CASCADA). IET Inf.
Secur., 16(6):470–481, 2022.
Ayan Sajwan and Girish Mishra. Comparative analysis of resnet and
densenet for diﬀerential cryptanalysis of SPECK 32/64 lightweight block
cipher. In International Conference on Cryptology & Network Security with
Machine Learning, pages 495–504. Springer, 2023.
Tao Sun, Dongsu Shen, Saiqin Long, Qingyong Deng, and Shiguo Wang.
Neural distinguishers on TinyJAMBU-128 and GIFT-64. In International
Conference on Neural Information Processing, pages 419–431. Springer,
2022.
Ling Sun, Wei Wang, and Meiqin Wang. Accelerating the search of differential and linear characteristics with the SAT method. IACR Trans.
Symmetric Cryptol., 2021(1):269–315, 2021.
Heng-Chuan Su, Xuan-Yong Zhu, and Duan Ming. Polytopic attack
on round-reduced Simon32/64 using deep learning. In Information Security and Cryptology: 16th International Conference, Inscrypt 2020,

26

E. Bellini et al.

Guangzhou, China, December 11–14, 2020, Revised Selected Papers, pages
3–20. Springer, 2021.
WTZ+ 22. Huijiao Wang, Jiapeng Tian, Xin Zhang, Yongzhuang Wei, and Hua Jiang.
Multiple diﬀerential distinguisher of SIMECK32/64 based on deep learning.
Security & Communication Networks, 2022.
YK21.
Tarun Yadav and Manoj Kumar. Diﬀerential-ml distinguisher: Machine
learning based generic extension for diﬀerential cryptanalysis. In Progress
in Cryptology LATINCRYPT 2021: 7th International Conference on Cryptology and Information Security in Latin America, Bogotá, Colombia, October 68, 2021, Proceedings, page 191212, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2021. SpringerVerlag.
YZS+ 15. Gangqiang Yang, Bo Zhu, Valentin Suder, Mark D. Aagaard, and Guang
Gong. The SIMECK family of lightweight block ciphers. Cryptology ePrint
Archive, Paper 2015/612, 2015.
ZC18.
Alice Zheng and Amanda Casari. Feature engineering for machine learning:
principles and techniques for data scientists. " O’Reilly Media, Inc.", 2018.
ZLWL23. Liu Zhang, Jinyu Lu, Zilong Wang, and Chao Li. Improved diﬀerentialneural cryptanalysis for round-reduced Simeck32/64. Frontiers of Computer Science, 17(6):176817, 2023.
ZWC23.
Liu Zhang, Zilong Wang, and Yindong Chen. Improving the accuracy
of diﬀerential-neural distinguisher for des, chaskey, and present. IEICE
TRANSACTIONS on Information and Systems, 106:1240–1243, 2023.
ZZY+ 21. Runlian Zhang, Mi Zhang, Jiaxu Yan, Yixing Li, Xiaonian Wu, and
Lingchen Li. Diﬀerential cryptanalysis of TweGIFT-128 based on neural
network. In 2021 IEEE Sixth International Conference on Data Science in
Cyberspace (DSC), pages 529–534. IEEE, 2021.

A

Useful diagrams of the analyzed ciphers

In this section, we report some useful diagrams that can help visualize the design
of the analyzed cipher.
Li−1

Ri−1
≪α

Li

≪β

⊙

≪γ

⊕

⊕

ki

Ri

Fig. 1. Round function of Simon and Simeck.

Generic Partial Decryption as Feature Engineering for Neural Distinguishers

wi

yi

xi

27

zi

⊙
⊕
⊙

sil

⊕

sir
≪ αi

≪ αi

⊙
⊕

≪ βi

⊙
⊕

⊕
w

i+1

x

i+1

y

i+1

z

i+1

⊕

≪ γi

⊕

si+1
l

⊕
si+1
r

Fig. 2. On the left the S-box π and on the right the component function Li of the
linear layer Λi in Aradi.

Table 2. Constants used in Aradi.
i mod 4 αi βi γi
0
1
2
3

11 8 14
10 9 11
9 4 14
8 9 7

